Israel bombs another school in one of
the worst attacks of its war on Gaza yet
it says it will attend ceasefire Talks
brokered by the US Qatar and Egypt next
week but Hamas has a new leader since
the assassination of Ismael Han so what
are the chances of a deal this time this
is Inside Story
[Music]
hello and welcome to the program I'm
sarel vaner each day a new horror for
the people of Gaza the bombing of a
school killing more than 100
Palestinians is the latest Israeli bombs
struck as renewed diplomatic efforts for
negotiations are intensifying brokered
by Qatar Egypt and the United States
it's hoped that talks will resume this
week previous attempts sought to
ceasefire the return of Israeli captives
held in Gaza and an exchange of
Palestinian prisoners held by Israel but
since the last major negotiations broke
down there have been big political
changes the head of Hamas in Gaza Yahya
senoir has been elected its overall
leader replacing Ismael Han who was
assassinated in tan and President Joe
Biden is no longer in the US
presidential race the contest now
between Donald Trump and comma Harris so
what are the chances of success for a
renewed International diplomatic push
for a SE ceasefire and what are the
biggest obstacles we'll be discussing
the situation with our guests shortly
first though this report from imin
Kimber an Israeli attack on a school in
Gaza kills more than 100 Palestinians
during morning
prayers an air strike launched as Qatar
Egypt and the United States call for
another round of negotiations to end the
violence that has killed more than
39,000 people and injured over 990,000
since October and to stop the risk of a
major regional
War the expansion of the war has become
a serious possibility if the
International Community and the
concerned countries do not move
immediately and effectively to stop the
war crimes being committed by Israel but
accusations of war crimes had no impact
on a reception recently given to Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in the
United States where he met President Joe
Biden vice president Kamala Harris and
her rival presidential candidate Donald
Trump he was given 50 standing ovations
as he addressed Congress no indication
of any desire to Hal Israel's war and
the chance of an escalation has
increased since Israel assassinated a
senior hezbo figure in Beirut and the
head of hamas's political wing and one
of the group's main negotiators Ismael
Han in tahran many Saw His killing as a
major blow to the talks according to
Media reports in Israel Israeli
negotiators believe Netanyahu is also
stalling attempts at a ceasefire for
political gain as he faces calls to step
down yet Israel has confirmed they will
attend a new round scheduled for August
the 15th but now they will be
negotiating with an organization led by
yahia sinoa formerly the head of Hamas
in Gaza sinoa is widely considered
Hardline and believed to be the
Mastermind behind the attacks on
Southern Israel on October the 7th sinir
was previously imprisoned by Israel and
has faced assassin attempts on the table
is likely to be an already established
framework based on a three-stage
ceasefire in the United States the
presidential election campaign is
intensifying and Democrats are hoping if
a ceasefire negotiated by President Joe
Biden is agreed it will help his vice
president and Democratic nominee kamla
Harris's chance of winning and with
Biden being nicknamed genocide Joe by
critics over his role in supporting
Israeli military during its War Harris
is also facing press
at this rally protesters heckled her
forcing her to respond now is the time
to get a ceasefire deal and get the
hostage deal
done now is the time and the president
and I are working around the clock in
Gaza Palestinians suffering bombardment
displacement hunger and and disease can
only wait to see if this latest attempt
at a ceasefire becomes a reality and
With Many Nations alarmed over the
threat of a regional War a sense of
urgency over the coming attempts to end
the horror in Gaza is acute imag in
Kimber Al jazer for Inside
Story let's bring in our guests from
rala is Mustafa baruti Secretary General
of the Palestinian national initiative
from Tel Aviv is Gideon Le columnist
with the har rett's newspaper and author
of the book the punishment of Gaza and
from Boston is Ramy hurri a political
analyst and distinguished public policy
fellow at the American University of
Beirut thank you very much to all of you
gentlemen for joining us I want to start
discussion with the exact same question
to all three of you which is the
mediators have been working on ceasefire
negotiations since
November without anything to show for it
do you believe that this new push for
for a ceasefire can get somewhere
Mustafa let's start with
you no I don't think it will get
anywhere as long as Netanyahu and his
fascist government are in power and as
long as the United States
Administration refuses to exercise any
serious pressure on Israel Netanyahu
will continue his genocide in Gaza and
will continue trying to push the region
into a regional War he is a very
dangerous man and he knows very well
that the end of this war is the end of
his political
career
Gan unfortunately I couldn't agree more
with my friend drob
baruti namely because the main obstacle
is netan and he did not change his mind
we will discuss it later what are his
motivations but it's very clear he does
not want a deal now and maybe not in any
time he wants this war to continue and
as long as this is the case all the
Goodwill and all the mediators can
continue to spread promises and requests
nothing will change
netan Ramy do you think there could be
perhaps a deal at the end of this new
push I agree with my friends and
colleagues that we shouldn't expect
anything to happen given the reality of
the Israeli government and the American
government who are the the main
obstacles but I also you know after 45
years of following this stuff um this
issue closely you you always have to
wait and see if anything changes down
the road the only thing that makes me
want to uh kind of suspend judgment a
little bit is the internal political
situation here in the United States we
we have an unprecedented situation where
the Palestine issue Gaza in particular
the Israeli genocide and the American
funding of it and arming of it in
particular they are suddenly on the
domestic political electoral map we
don't know if they will have an impact
or not but things are evolving very
quickly in the domestic American
political scene and and Gaza is if it's
not Central it's certainly a critical
element in that changing uh environment
but the evidence of how the US has
behaved for the last 10 months and the
last 40 50 years suggest that there we
should not expect anything to happen
because the United States um is
enthusiastic about what uh Israel is
doing in Gaza okay so listening to all
three of you uh you've mentioned
Netanyahu uh both Mustafa and Gideon
have mentioned Netanyahu as an obstacle
to peace and all three of you uh I
believe have mentioned how important the
US role is here so let's start with
Netanyahu we have to cover both anyway
but let's start with Netanyahu um
Mustafa you see no change in his
position policy or inclination to
negotiate since the beginning of this
war correct absolutely not on the
contrary he's more determined to
continue his policy especially after the
Improvement of his status in electoral
electoral
polls I think he's relying on the fact
that the not only he has a fascist
government but the Israeli Society
itself is moving uh unfortunately in the
direction of fascism and the fact that
69% of the uh people who have who
participated in a recent poll said that
they support assassination of
Palestinian and and and libanese leaders
even if that blocks the possibility of
getting back the Israeli prisoners is an
indication of that uh more than that I
think Netanyahu is implementing a
strategy he has been talking about for
for for decades he wants genocide
because he wants ethnic cleansing of
Gaza the only explanation of his policy
in Gaza is that he still hopes and
dreams about ethnic cleansing of the
whole population of Gaza by making Gaza
unlivable today's terrible Massacre that
the Israeli Army committed in one of the
shelters one of the schools one out of
80 schools that were attacked in the
same manner is a very clear indication
of that but more than that Netanyahu
still hopes that he will push the United
States into a war with Iran he wants to
destroy Iran through a war in which the
United States itself will do the work
this is his dream and unfortunately the
United States Administration is doing
nothing to stop him from this very
dangerous course you mentioned at the
beginning of your answer netanyahu's
improving status in uh polls and Gideon
that is something I wanted to ask you I
was quite surprised when I researched
this conversation right preparing for
this show to see that just a day ago
Israeli press published a poll in which
Netanyahu is now ahead of Benny gance
first time I believe since October 7th
and his leud party if elections were
held today or tomorrow according to this
poll which was published in maiv um leud
would be the number one party in Israel
all this teaches you serial that it's
the story of Israel not the story of
nany the support of Netanyahu and even
the protest the boundaries of the
Israeli protest which was quite devoted
and quite powerful for while but it had
very very clear borders and it never
crossed them almost never crossed them
namely we don't oppose the war we don't
condemn the crimes we don't protest
against the mess killings we don't
protest against the starvation and the
and the and the
destruction all those things create the
situation in which netan does not have a
real
alternative in the outside the world
people only think that once we'll get
rid of netan Israel will turn into the
paradise that we used to dream about no
my friends Israel
is by its vast majority supporting
what's happening in Gaz and standing
behind it it is true that netan makes it
worse but do you think that any
alternative will do it differently I
have my doubts and as Mustafa just me
mentioned there were some evidences for
this reason in any case netan is Israel
and Israel is netan when it comes to the
war when it comes to the aparte and when
it comes to the occupation it is
different when it comes to Tactical
questions to questions of of of maners
the question of of his behavior but this
is irrelevant what we Face here is quite
a one front of Israel want this war to
continue and this is unbelievable and
unprecedent so Ramy then let's take it
over to you um we've have both Mustafa
and Gideon telling us that Netanyahu is
an obstacle to peace and he pretty much
has Israeli Society broadly speaking
behind him um even in light of of the
anti-government protest that we saw that
lasted for months even in light of that
Netanyahu is actually improving in terms
of his popularity his electoral Outlook
etc
etc right so so what is there anything
that could compel Netanyahu to change
his stance then in theory yes intense
pressure from the United States to cut
off arms um go to the IC you know do all
these terrible things that that are
terrible for Israel but that are good
for the rule of law and for righteous
Behavior by human rights uh obeying
citizens all around the world uh but but
that's not going to happen the United
States was making small small little
rhetorical adjustments mainly Kamala
Harris saying softer things at the same
time saying Israel has the right to
defend itself but the problem here is
deeper than even I would say than what
Mustafa and Gideon are saying and and I
know they agree with me but uh the
problem is Zionism the that Zionism has
always wanted to achieve these goals get
the Palestinians Out Create a Jewish
state and then see what happens this has
always been the Zionist philosophy and
they see a chance of achieving it now
they're going ahead with it in the West
Bank and Gaza and East Jerusalem and
everywhere um and the world is doing
almost nothing it's quite extraordinary
so the conclusion is that the that the
majority of Israelis support this
Zionist
genocidal apartheid racist Colonial
takeover of all Palestine with increas
extreme brutality
to civilians and the parallel conclusion
is the Western Democratic free world as
they call themselves are eagerly
supporting this they're doing nothing to
stop it uh there can be no other the
evidence Ramy can I jump in for a second
because you say the root cause of this
is is the the underpinning beliefs of
Zionism but I want to push back against
that just a little bit because there are
movements within Zionist within Zionism
uh I think almost everybody on the
Israeli political stage would would call
themselves zionists but they don't all
believe the same thing and they don't
all believe that Palestinians should be
dealt with in the same way so Gideon
perhaps I take this uh to you do do do
you agree with what Ramy was saying that
really the root cause of this is Zionism
yes I feel myself agreeing too much here
but no other choice but there are new
aners and I want to elaborate on this
there are the right-wingers who admit
that they are f
who admit that Zionism is only about
Jewish Supremacy who admit that the
Palestinians have no rights whatsoever
between the river and the Sea and who
admit that their vision is to somehow
either get rid of the Palestinians or
leave them in the same status without
any rights on the other side the other
Camp the what we call the left is
Zionist or or the Zionist left or the
central left they are more sop icated
and therefore I see them as more
disturbing because they cover it up they
don't admit it they want to occupy
softly they want to make it in a
friendly way they would meet again and
again with a bu in Endless peace
conferences they would declare that they
in favor of the two-state solution even
though they know that there are no
chances anymore for any viable
Palestinian state that they will promise
the Americans that they are people of
peace and they will not stop talking
about peace and continuing to occupy
exactly like their right- Wingers only
in a softer way and you choose which one
of those two you prefer the one where
you what you see is what you get or the
one who mislead you now for decades and
decades promising all kind of promises
and doing nothing we need to reopen the
chapter of the US and American pressure
uh Ramy signaled at the beginning and so
did Mustafa how important this was uh
this it's not breaking news we've been
saying for months that really the only
country that has any real significant
leverage over Israel is the US uh we
also know that the US continues to fund
Israel Mustafa pointed out that they've
just released another $3.5 billion
dollar worth of uh military funding uh
for Israel in its war effort uh they're
also obviously also selling the weapons
and providing weapons Ramy is there
you're saying that there are rhetorical
very minor differences between Biden
Harris and within under the Democratic
tent in the US is there
anything uh any reason to believe the us
is going to change its policy anytime
soon uh the the quick answer is no
there's no evidence all we have are uh
little hints uh small little Nuance
change changes in tone uh from kamla
Harris and her vice presidential Pig um
and things like that but what we do have
for the first time ever uh is a
Democratic party that is very scared
that its Gaza policy supporting the
genocide and doing nothing to pressure
um Israel into a ceasefire May cost it
losing a couple of Swing States
especially Michigan Pennsylvania
Wisconsin uh and and this is what
terrified of we don't know if this is
going to happen because the trouble now
is that there are so many new uh
emotional dimensions of what's going on
especially with the with the new
Democratic uh candidates that there's a
bit of euphoria uh and this will die
down in a week or so the election the
camp uh Convention of the Democrats is
coming up 19 to 22 August the key uh
signs will come out of that convention
if there are elements in the program the
the platform that kamla Harris puts in
because she then can control the
Democratic party's position she can't do
that now this is one of her weaknesses
but if there are real changes talking
about uh arms embargo holding up Aid
going to the ICC implementing the
American laws about you can't give sell
arms to people who deny other people's
human rights these are all clear Israeli
violations of us and international law
if there are any clear signs are going
to come out the Democratic platform we
shouldn't expect anything before August
uh 22 but there but the other thing
that's fascinating as public opinion so
Ry let's let's pause that for a second
because that raises an obvious question
and and maybe I'll ask this one to
Mustafa if the US and if you provided
you agree with this premise that the US
isn't about to change its its policy in
any major way in the short term if that
is so why did the US table once
again uh a a new push for a ceasefire if
it knows it is not going to compel
Israel to agree to one well uh before I
answer your question I have to make one
comment about what was said before which
is that uh I totally agree that we will
not see peace in this region without the
ending of the settler Colonial Zionist
project uh and that you cannot be a
Zionist and be Democrat you cannot be a
Zionist and be called left that's
impossible because Z mean means racism
and what we see here is different levels
of racism but it's all racist it's
racist because these people don't
believe that Palestinians have the right
to be in their own country and they
don't believe that Palestinians have the
right for freedom and they don't believe
that Palestinians have the right to be
equal now talking about the new push of
course the United States would prefer if
this war could end without upsetting
Israel uh and maybe they hope through
this kind of action uh to to achieve
something some kind of pressure on the
Palestinian side to accept Israeli
conditions which is of course impossible
but on the other hand uh I must say that
uh this is not going to stop Israel
United States will not go in the
direction of imposing sanctions on
Israel and without sanctions on Israel
nothing will change but there are
factors that will push Israel the first
factor is the fact that it is failing in
achieving military goals the fact that
it is failing in eliminating Palestinian
resistance the fact that it is failing
in imposing its control on Gaza the fact
that they are also suffering from huge
human Lo human losses the largest ever I
mean I mean with the exception of maybe
1973 War uh they they they have had
thousands of people who are injured or
killed this is a factor but the other
very important factor is that Israeli
economy is now suffering from very
serious damage and uh I think everybody
knows now that Israel has very big
deficit that the cost of this war will
reach something like $70 billion that
major parts of the Israeli economy are
falling apart and there is a risk of a
regional War which is not going to be a
picnic for the Israeli soci they have us
funding so perhaps the economic concerns
and economic fears might be allayed by
that no because the United States has
already given is with this new package
$23.5 billion for military equipment and
weapons I don't think that the United
States is ready to give them $50 billion
to fix the economy I don't think so and
I think this will have very serious
impact on the Israeli side and but at
the end of the day we have to we have to
say that real the the real goal if we
want Israel to change if we want to stop
this genocide if we want to stop this
terrible war crimes that are happening
on the ground
the world must impose sanctions on
Israel must impose boycot on Israel
Israel's Israel's case today is no
different from the the the aparti system
that was in South Africa at one point of
time and Israel is now even practicing a
much worth upper tide so what we need is
sanctions what we need is Boycott and
that is the only language that Israel
will understand in terms of
international Behavior we have four
minutes left I want to make sure we
discuss the the last part of it as I see
there are three main things we've
discussed Israel we've discussed the US
their positions what's changing and
what's not changing more importantly we
haven't discussed Hamas um Mustafa back
to you on this what's Victory what does
Victory look like for Yahya sinir the
new overall leader of Hamas I think for
sinir victory was achieved on the 7th of
October and for him now but I mean now
given that we're talking about this
renewed push for a
SE what what he wants is ceasefire I
think that's what Palestinian movement
wants ceasefire to stop the suffering of
the people don't forget Israel has
killed already 50,000 Palestinians
including 10,000 who are under the rebel
we have 93,000 injured people many of
whom will die because Israel has
destroyed the whole medical
infrastructure people are suffering from
lack of food people are suffering from
horrible humanitarian conditions we
Israel is now conducting biological
warfare on the people of Gaza we have
72,000 cases of infectious hepatitis we
have cases of menitis we could see
cholera tomorrow we could see even potis
so it's a very dangerous situation the
end of the war is the demand and that's
what everybody wants including sinir the
end of the war withdrawal of Israeli
Army from Gaza and allowing us to fix
this horrible horrible disaster that
Israel has caused the worst manmade
humanitarian crisis ever Gan this may
sense like a bit of a strange question
but uh
Israel publicly officially wants to kill
sinir much like it killed Ismael Han do
Israelis see a contradiction in the fact
that we're talking about ceasefire
negotiations um and we all know Israel
wants to kill The Negotiator on the
other side it killed already you don't
have to go far isma Ania was a
negotiator and Israel killed him which
might be one of the most foolish actions
that isra ever done not to speak about
lack of legit legitimacy Because by the
end of the day Ania was not a armed
person I'm not sure he ever hold a gun
in his life but in any case Israel
killed him and Israel wants to kill Sila
because for Israel assassinations is a
policy clouded by by most of the
Israelis supported by most of the
Israelis who are really enthusiastic
about those assassinations it's reminds
them the James Bond films and they never
ask about the consequences of those
assassinations so in aever iseli will
not see any any contradiction today we
negotiate with Sinai and tomorrow we'll
kill him and it will be legitimate Ramy
Last Words the Israelis since the 1930s
have killed British officials
Palestinian uh national leaders they
killed PLO leaders they've killed
anybody that they feel is challenging
them um in Palestine and they will keep
killing as long as they need to if
nobody stops them but all the killings
have only brought Israel to the most
dangerous position of its life in the
last century it's now surrounded by five
or six non-state Arab militant Arab
actors armed actors who are very
powerful more powerful than any of the
Arab countries that fought Israel Israel
is being isolated around the world um
the US support for it is declining Stead
even among Jews so it's in the worst
position it's ever been and all it does
is keep doing what it knows how to do
get the Palestinians out of Palestine
kill them incarcerate them lay Siege to
them imprison them torture them do all
the terrible things and they'll keep
doing it as long as nobody stops them
with the same results that's why there
has to be a massive International
intervention in a political manner that
defines and contains Zionism we've
accepted to live with a Jewish majority
Israeli State many times Palestinians
have the Arabs have the Islamic world
has they're not interested uh the
Zionist philosophy and the fascinating
thing is the Zionist philosophy didn't
start with Jews it started with
Christian fundamentalist extremists in
England and the United States in the
1860s even before Herzel and the idea of
Zionism so we have to get to the core of
this issue which is the collusion
between Western powers and uh Zionist
forces to create this zombie killing
machine this Unleashed Frankenstein
monster of death that Israel has become
and we see all these pictures every day
uh children without heads and feet
without bodies uh and nobody's stopping
it so there has to be a decisive moment
when this stops and we shift to trying
to live in peace with everybody
inshallah and that is the time we have
for today I want to thank all our guests
Mustafa baruti Gan leevy and Ramy
thank you twoo for watching you can see
the program again anytime by visiting
our website alo.com for further
discussion go to our Facebook page
that's
facebook.com AJ insidestory you can also
join the conversation on X our handle at
AJ insidestory from me sah vaner and the
entire team here in Doha bye for now
make sure to subscribe to our channel to
get the latest news from Al jazer